because
the Texas and Southwestern cattle raisers in
their executive committee say, well, you know,
these youngsters have had eight years of college,
but now they should know everything. Yeah, right.
Oh, sure.
Okay, so that's as far as our pressures on the
clinical. How about the pressures on the
research, which you said was another one of the
aims that you wanted to improve? Well, as I
mentioned, When I came here, and you've
interviewed Dr. Price, and you mentioned that he
left you with a perception of the growth of the
college. And it had been phenomenal. And the
physical plant had grown not as much as it should
have, but certainly it had grown substantially.
And the numbers of students had become
overwhelming. biggest in the nation. We were on an
accelerated program where they finished in three
years. We had started a
undergraduate program in biomedical science.
And so we had students running out of our ears. And
in this complex at one time or another, we had
1,500, 1,600 students, which is unbelievable for
a professional school. Most veterinary schools
think in terms of working with only 500 or 600
students at best. So our teaching program was
enormous. Our faculty, many of them were spending
16, 18, 20 hours a week actually in laboratory
lecture facing students. My goodness. That
didn't leave any time for us. It doesn't. That's
right. So what we had was a teaching mill. We had a
few professors that had joint appointments with
the Agricultural Experiment Station, or
something like that, where there may be 50%
research that could find a little time to do
research. But 80% of our faculty were doing none,
or very little. And we were so oriented toward the
teaching program that it was very difficult to
find time for the faculty And even more difficult
than finding time was changing the orientation,
changing the direction of the faculty. They had
gotten into a habit. They had gotten into a rut. And
that trimester system just rolled over like a
wheel in a rut. And you'd turn over three times in a
year. And then you'd just keep right down that rut.
And I remember one of my first eye-opening
experiences came to Texas A&M. I had a young
faculty member that, probably 35 years old, and he
had just come back from Iowa State with a new PhD two
or three years before, a few years before. And one
night at a social function, I asked him, I said, how
can we shift the emphasis of our program and get
more research going? And he looked me straight in
the eye and said, why should I? Or why should we? Now
I knew I had a problem. Because, you know, that
never dawned on me that a young man of that
background and orientation would question why we
should need more research. But, you know, he
looked me in the eye and said, why should we? And
that's when I knew I had a problem. Because what he
was really reflecting was the attitude of a lot of
the faculty. So it's been... hard battle. Dr.
Price made a noble effort to move this before he
stepped out when he brought Dr. Maurer
here. He had done a noble effort and he had
jarred a few cracks open But, boy, it was still a
long way to go. And it has still been a long way to go,
and it still is. And what steps have you taken? I
mean, have you given them some release time or
maybe more sabbatical-type time? Because
research just consumes so much time. Well, Terry,
I guess the thing is, I've done all I could, but the
biggest nightmare has been...
overcoming attitudes, overcoming attitudes of
faculty and overcoming attitudes of department
heads. We fight like mad to keep all our positions
filled, because it's only by keeping positions
filled that we are able to have time to give faculty
members relief for a semester, like those that are
in the block training system in the clinic. What we
try to do is give every faculty member over three
blocks of the 10 off, that's 15 weeks a year, that
they're free of teaching. So that gives them some
time for scholarship or self-study,
self-improvement. And if they can get some
research in there, fine. But we've tried, like
everything, to add a few new positions. It's been
tough to add positions. And the difficulty there
is this. We're under the formula and under all the
teaching load reports, and we can only justify new
positions by student
enrollment, really, and student credit hours
taught. So if you do that, then you sort of catch 22.
Yeah, exactly. You're right where you started
again. So it's been a difficult thing. It's a
problem with the legislature, then. Yeah, the
Texas legislature, as you well know, and I'm sure
you hear this all the time. They really don't
believe in research. No. And, for instance, the
organized research, you know how little they fund
that and how repeatedly they've quacked at it and
tried to cut it out. And all that is is just a little
seed money for young teachers to try to get them
started. And it the best investment that state
could make. But the organized research is a
stepchild and it, you know, they get up over there
and they talk about how some of those dollars have
been used or some professor could study the color
of lizard coats and tree lizard or something, you
know, and they think they're being funny because
they don't understand research and they don't
understand what it means. So The only approaches
that we've had a little luck with, and I think where
we've made the most progress, is by recruiting
young faculty from other institutions that know
the importance of it and who are willing to do the
extra work, walk the extra mile to get started. And
once you can ever get the start where you can get
some sponsored research money and you can relieve
a part of a person's salary to leave them on to a
research program. Then you can build from that,
and you relieve their faculty time. You let you
hire some other teachers to do the teaching. And
this is how the College of Engineering has been
able to do it, and some others that have been more
successful than we have. College of Geoscience
has been able to do it. Part of me, they have
sponsors where they can get research money better
than we can. We're fighting a tough market. right
now. It would have been so much easier to have done
it in the 60s. When there was more money. When there
was more research money. But for whatever reason,
and I don't know what the political pressures were
on Dr. Price and the executive committee in the
60s, but for whatever reason they decided to
expand enrollment. And there was a great pressure
to expand enrollment. Whatever there was, they
did that and they didn't push research. for
whatever reason. And so you'd consider yourself
the first dean then to push research? Oh, I don't
know, because Dr. Price... Emphasize, we'll say.
I pushed a little harder than Dr. Price did. Dr.
Price was trying, you know. I sure want to be fair,
because he began to, he set the rules in motion, and
he was trying. Perhaps I'm the first one that's
made more fuss about it, trying... Some of the
faculty members say it's all I care about. That's
not right. I've tried to bring balance. I believe
in strong teaching as much as anybody, but I've
tried to bring balance to the program, try to
improve our clinical training program, try to
improve our research effort without damaging our
teaching program. How many hours a week, or what's
the course load for an assistant professor, the
average professor? Well, it varies all over the
place because our teaching is so much different
from, say, history or sociology or political
science or engineering even, although it's more
like engineering. We have so many lab hours. So
much of our teaching has to be done, especially in
the clinical area, in small, very narrow
student-teacher ratios, one to three, one to
four. And that's expensive and time-consuming.
Because our profession is esoteric. The graduate
immediately enters a field of private practice,
and the average client doesn't really know what a
veterinary knows what his training is, just like
medicine. And so there's a great demand for
quality control. And that's what we've been able
to do in American schools that they don't do in some
other places like Mexico or Italy or so forth when
they'll take classes of 500 students and lecture
to them. They don't know whether they've learned
anything or not. We have the very... Narrow
student-teacher ratios in the clinical sciences
where the instructor works closely with the
individual to know whether they can do surgery or
not, whether they can operate a radiological
equipment, whether they can operate an
anesthetic machine without killing the patient.
And these things have to be done almost like a
one-on-one, one-on-three, something like that.
And so I'd say try to get back to your question. I
feel that it, and I think it varies a great deal.
Yes, ma'am. Excuse me. Your 11 o'clock
appointment's here. All right. Thank you. I feel
that it
varies, but somehow a teacher shouldn't have to
face students, whether in the lecture room or the
lavatory or on rounds in the clinic. He or she
shouldn't have to face students more than about 15
hours a week, whatever system, whatever shape.
But now I know a lot of our clinicians do. Some of
them are 20, 25 hours a week. That must be draining.
It is, very draining, very draining. It's just too
much. They need time for reflection, time for
thought, time for preparation, time for study,
time for self-development. It's so hard to do.
We've tried to improve some by bringing in the
residency training program. We bring the young
veterinarians in for two and three years of
postgraduate training. And when did you start
this program? We started in about 75. And now we
have about 20 students in residency training. And
they give some of the clinicians, the senior
staff, some relief. And you bring these men and
women right out of the field then? Well, they
either come through a one-year internship, or
they may take their internship in a private
practice. But when we bring them into residency,
they've had at least one year experience
post-graduate. And then they go into a residency
program of two or three years. And this moves them
towards certification in one of the 12 colleges,
specialty colleges, like surgery, internal
medicine, radiology, pathology, and on and on.
That's a great idea. Was that your idea,
basically? Well, it was my idea to try to build a
residency program because we didn't have one when
I came here. But I can't claim, you know, I couldn't
claim ID for the residency program because they
started in other schools before. Oh, I see. That
sounds like, that's more like a medical doctor
residency training. Pattern after pattern, very
similar. And a way to, so the young person can
specialize. Yeah. It's been another way to push
back the curtain of ignorance into clinical
sciences. Mm-hmm. uh, as different from the
traditional graduate program, the master's and
PhD research program. This is more oriented
toward the service or clinical program. But
we've, uh, we felt that they've helped us. It's
helped us a great deal in two respects. One, it's
taken some weight off of the senior faculty, uh,
facing students, as I mentioned, so many hours a
day, but also those young minds are the most
progressive, probing young minds in the, in the
field. And they stimulate the older professor,
too. So it's been good. I think it would be
tremendous. I think it's an excellent idea. It's
been helpful, very helpful. And how many a year do
we have? Well, we have about, let's see, I think
about 22 residents right now. No, no, 22 interns
and residents. We have four interns and the rest
are residents, so 22 altogether. And we graduate
each year about, there'll be about three in the
large animal finish and about three in small. Each
year we'll have two to three finish. And they go on
to become faculty members somewhere else or they
may go into specialty practice. They get their
boards in a couple of years after they finish here.
Sounds like an excellent. Do we have a couple more
minutes or do we have to quit? Yeah. If you can, or we
could... No, I just want to ask you about those
residency training, the clinical aspects, sound
like a couple of your accomplishments. What else
would you consider your accomplishments? And
then let's talk about some things that you might
consider your shortcomings as the dean.
Well, I guess strengthening the clinical program
has been my... I guess something I could point to
that, well, I didn't do. I've helped and aided to
accomplish. Dean never does anything really. He
just creates the environment to get it done. Put
some weight behind it. Yeah. Leans. There's leans
and lashes a little in there. That has been one. I
think I would have to. I would say that I have been
able to build better bridges with the state, the
industry, and so forth by working hard to build the
bridges with the commodity groups, industrial
groups, by our advisory board development. We've
moved ahead in development, private sector
creation of a development council.
We've improved our research, I think, some. And
I'll put that on the negative side, too, because
not enough. But I think we've made some progress.
We had pretty good progress with the Institute of
Comparative Medicine, a joint effort with Baylor
until the governor shot it down two years ago. But
that allowed us to improve our research efforts
and bring some faculty in we couldn't have brought
in otherwise. Was it too expensive for Clements?
Oh, the governor just got it because he had run on a
political promise of cutting taxes, and it was
vulnerable to his red pencil. So he cut it out in
1979. It was another one of those 5% waste things.
Yeah. He ran on Proposition 13 in Texas, where we
had the lowest tax base in the country. But that's
part of this business. You win some and you lose
some. But I think we have improved our research
effort to some degree and had some success with it.
I think we've built a better bridge with the
industry. Certainly not what I'd like to see, but I
think it's a lot better. I think we're working
better with the especially with the Texas
Agricultural Experiment Station. And we've
developed some interdepartmental research
programs in the college, like the one we have going
with brucellosis, which is a substantial name, a
good effort, giving us national visibility. So,
yes, I think we've been able to improve our
clinical program, and overall we've improved our
research program. And those were two goals that I
came here with. And I think we've been fairly
successful. I guess I also saw after coming here
that we needed to move away from the accelerated
program. So we're moving away from that. I think
that was an accomplishment for Dr. Price in early
60s. On the flip side of the coin, I think it's
almost an accomplishment for me or for our current
administration, executive committee, to go back
because I think it had outlived its usefulness. So
in other words, we're keeping a flexible
administration. That's right. In terms of the
times. Oh, yes. No way to get a rigid one. We have to
respond to changing times and changing needs. How
about shortcomings? Things that you wanted to do,
but you, well, you said research, for example. You
want to get more research time, and you want to have
more people doing research. I want to see the
research program better. I want to see more people
here with national visibility in research. I
think we have a state, the economy, the resources.
We ought to be stronger in research. I hope that in
the next few years, we can keep moving in that way.
step out of here in a few years, I can at least feel
that it's moving in that direction. So I want to see
the research effort build and do much better than
it has so far. I still would like to see us improve
our program and food animal medicine more than we
have. And we have to do that. We have to get some
better leadership there. We have a number of
people getting on toward retirement, maybe with
their When those people step down, we can find some
stronger leadership in food animal medicine.
It's been tough because the faculty there is
getting a bit old. Other areas that I think there's
a need for curricular change, a substantial
curriculum change, and
I don't know. We've had a curriculum committee.
We've pushed them pretty hard into it. in-depth
study for the last three years now. And at times, it
seems like maybe we're making some breakthrough.
But we need change in two areas. Number one, a
curriculum more attuned to the needs of the last
decade of this century and the first decade of the
next century. And also, we need improvement in our
teaching methods. We're still kind of obsolete
there. I'm hoping that shifting back to a
four-year curriculum, maybe getting some time
for people to have some time in the summers to work
on instructional methods will help. And that's
one of the reasons I would have to say I fought hard
to leave the accelerated program. And I say that in
all due respect to Dr. Price and the people that in
the early 1960s saw fit to go that way. But I sure saw
fit to go out. And it's been tough to do that. It
hadn't been easy. We need more time for reflection
and for research, then.
I'm not sure I'm following your question. More
time for reflection, for teaching methods, and
staying on top of your discipline and your subject
matter, more time to read the material, and more
time for the professor to do the research. Oh,
yeah. Those are the reasons, I think. We're
shifting the focus now. Yeah. Those are the
justifications, I think. Now, if you had to rank
Texas A&M, I know it's the largest student body as
far as the largest vet school in the country. If you
had to rank it along teaching and research, how
would you rank it? My students come in all the time.
I have a lot of pre-vet students. They're
excellent students. They come in there. They're
eager. They want to know how to improve in my
course. It's a pleasure to have them. And they
always want to know, tell me everything you know
about the vet school. So I want to get it firsthand.
They say, I know it's the largest. I don't know how a
professional, though, would rank it. Well, we're
not, in my opinion, we're not the top school by a
substantial number. And we're not the bottom by a
hell of a long way either. I guess, and I know they
have some weaknesses just like we do, I guess I'd
rank California Davis top overall.
In research, then I'd put Cornell probably
second. Cornell might even be first in research.
in the orientation toward comparative medicine,
orientation with human medicine, and from a
strictly overall
scholarship, I'd rank University of
Pennsylvania second or third. So Davis,
Pennsylvania, and Cornell, some combination.
Although I think our clinical program and our
teaching program might be stronger than Cornell.
I'd place us in right below that tier. The next
group of three or four. I'd place Texas A&M, Ohio
State, Iowa State in that tier.
I could point out areas that we're probably
stronger than any. Okay, would you do that for me?
Well, I really think from the standpoint of our
students being ready to move into the business
world or to the professional world of practice to
go to work the day they graduate, I really think our
graduates may be at the top of the whole box.
But from the standpoint of the in-depth
education, I'm not sure that's true.
And I think we're still suffering from the effects
of the accelerated program. I would hope that in
four to five years that we could say that our
overall teaching, research, and service, judged
on all three, that we'd be either tops or among the
top three. And I don't think that's unreasonable.
Some people might say we're there now. I don't
think we are. Because I think we're still
lopsided.
But I think it's, see, we'll be back on a four-year
curriculum. in 1982. And I think from there,
within another three years, if we can keep getting
the resources that we need, we can be among the top
three. Because right now, I know Cornell's having
problems keeping their standard. They still have
the strong research program. They have a much
smaller school than we do. They only take 75
students. And so as a result, maybe they are able to
give a little more in-depth training than we are.
But I think we can be a moment. Sounds like you have
your challenges for the future. Well,
are there some other issues? These are basically
the things that I wanted to talk about. Are there
other issues that you might want to explore in a
later interview? Or do you think we should close it
at this? Are there other things that you'd like to
say? Up ahead, I don't know, Terry. I don't know. I
couldn't say there are. Well, maybe you should
read the transcript. All right. Well, thanks a
lot. If after, when you're all ready to close, you
have other questions, well, I'd be glad to try to
answer them or chat with you about them. But I don't
know of anything else. One last thing, and that is,
why are more students, why is vet school, entrance
into vet school, more competitive today than
medical school? It seems like the last 10 years,
maybe even longer, there's just been this great
surge of students who want to go to vet school. It
has dropped off some. It is beginning to drop off.
But you're right. I'm not sure. I've thought about
that a lot and theorized. I have some theories
about it. I think that we had a reaction from the 68
to 70 time, when all the young people were striving
for relevancy, trying to see some value to why they
were working, to life. They tried to turn back to
nature. They swarmed into courses like what
diseases of fish and wildlife when there weren't
any jobs there. There weren't enough jobs there.
As a result of books like James Harold's All
Creatures Great and Small, I could see maybe some
basic values in being able to administer to the
health and well-being of animals. And then, of
course, That almost assumed an equal rank with
medicine for a lot of young people. Many of them
sort of were turned off to medicine because they
had the image that medicine was so monetary and so
financially oriented. Well, I don't know. But of
course, there were only, at that time, 18
veterinary schools, and there were 120 medical
schools. It was harder to get into veterinary
schools because of the numbers. And so that built
an artificial situation that we've had to deal
with. And we talked about it earlier this morning.
But that was a factor. I guess that was part of it. So
now you think that it's on the decline? It's
tipping away from that. Many states, the numbers
have dropped off. Marketly, we haven't seen much
drop off. On the other hand, we haven't had any
increase either. In fact, I guess we have about 100
less applicants now than we did at the peak. But
still, you have about 600 who are qualified. About
500 now. Oh, so it has dropped down. Yeah, from 600.
Slightly under five now, where one time it was six.
So we're down 100. Do you see this as a tendency for
the future? Do you think it's going to drop down a
little bit more? I would anticipate that it will. I
think it will. and everything goes in cycles.
Sure, sure. Well, thanks a lot for this interview.
I really appreciate it. My pleasure.